ADDING A GENERATOR

READ FIRST
mathsgen/core.py
mathsgen/catalogue.py
mathsgen/family.py: GeneratorFamily, the shared generate/validate flow.
mathsgen/rich_blocks.py: rich prompt builders.
Preferred templates for new work:
- number_operations.py: expression templates checked against displayed text.
- fraction_skills.py: story prompts and an independent digit-level check.
- functions.py: several families with structural levels in one module.
Older relevant generators:
- percentage_amount.py: backwards construction with exact fractions.
- median_range.py: constrained data generation, uniqueness proved by
  search, and an independent SymPy/statistics check.
- selection_probability.py: event model and independent enumeration.
- simplify_ratio.py: units, exact decimals and normalization.

Avoid using the older worked-solution-heavy modules as a template unless
their particular mathematics is relevant.

REQUIRED SHAPE
A module exports a class with:
- info: GeneratorInfo
- generate(seed, difficulty=1, settings=None) -> Question
- validate(question) -> True or raises ValueError
- validate_independently(question) -> True or raises ValueError

The class has no required constructor arguments.
Import it and register one instance in build_registry().

GENERATION CONTRACT
Use make_context(info, seed, difficulty, settings).
Use context.rng only; never global random state.
Current generators reject nonempty settings.
Use context.identity as the question ID.
Store generator version, seed, difficulty and settings in the Question.
Store enough exact parameters to reconstruct and check the displayed problem.
Fraction values are serialized with rational_text(), never floats.
Return worked_solution=() for new generators.
Call self.validate(question) before returning.

CONTENT
Content.text is always a complete human-readable fallback for CLI use.
New generators author prompts with schema-5 rich blocks (rich_blocks.py):
paragraphs mixing text and inline maths runs, and display equations.
Rich blocks require empty math_tex and display_text=None.
Build blocks from exact parameters; never parse prose into maths.
Every maths run carries its own plain-text fallback.
Adjacent runs without whitespace stay together, keeping punctuation
attached to maths.
Plain-language prompts with no notation can simply use Content(text).
Legacy text/math_tex/display_text prompts still render; convert them only
as presentation work, bumping the generator version.
Answer data should be structured and exact.
answer_display provides a readable text answer and optional TeX.
Use sensible marks and LayoutHint working space.
Marks are currently indicative, not exam-board calibrated.

CURRENT RENDERING BOUNDS
MathText supports a subset of TeX; do not assume full LaTeX.
Mathematics uses vector outlines.
Question schema v4 supports question_visuals and answer_visuals sequences.
Legacy diagram remains supported; do not combine it with question_visuals.
Visuals support scenes, tables, coordinate plots, histogram bars and box plots.
PDF prompts honour display_text even without math_tex, allowing a complete
CLI fallback without repeating table data in the PDF.
Answer visuals appear only in answer/worked PDFs. SVG export is blocked by
Pythonista's unavailable native FreeType dependency.
PDF renderer rejects overwide mathematics and questions too tall for a page.
Validate a PDF only when new notation creates a concrete rendering risk.
Routine expansion should concentrate on generation, validation and samples.

VALIDATION CONTRACT
Check the answer against the emitted mathematical problem.
Check nondegeneracy, domains, units, simplification and difficulty bounds.
Check that displayed questions and displayed answers match their data.
Use require(), which stays active under optimized Python.
Do not merely compare an answer with a second copy of its construction code.
Use SymPy, enumeration or a mathematically distinct calculation as appropriate.
Add targeted corruption/rejection checks where useful.

FOCUSED CHECKS (DEFAULT)
Write one smoke per module: 40 seeds per level for validation,
corruption rejection and PDF widths; SymPy or other independent checks on
the first 8 seeds (they are slow on device, and the user prefers short
runs). Print distinct prompts per level and export a small specimen PDF
for review by eye. smoke_algebra_basics.py is the current template; its
bump_first_int corruption helper works for any parameter shape.

BULK CHECK (ONLY FOR A CONCRETE RISK)
    RUN icloud:projects/mathsgen/mathsgen_cli.py
    ARGS: validate NEW.ID --runs 1000 --independent --json
Roughly 14 seconds per 1000 SymPy-checked questions on device.

Review examples at every difficulty.
The bulk runner checks reproducibility as well as mathematical validation.
It retains the first ten failure details and counts all failures.

WORKSHEETS
A spec contains title, shuffle and sections.
Each section selects either topic or generator_ids, plus count and
difficulties (a list of levels).
Topic sections automatically include newly registered generators.
Explicit generator IDs preserve deliberate curriculum selection.
Scheduling balances generator/level pairs over complete cycles; partial
cycles are shuffled and need not give perfectly equal marginal counts.
Duplicate displayed prompts are retried up to 100 attempts per slot.
Small finite families can exhaust their variety: do not remove duplicate
protection to conceal that.

Current quick CLI difficulty parsing only supports levels 1–4.
There are not yet weighted difficulty distributions or settings per section.

AFTER A NEW GENERATOR PASSES
Record its ID, version, evidence and known limitations.
Add it to an appropriate explicit worksheet spec/profile when useful.
Update the handoff and checkpoint after a meaningful batch.
Do not add a new framework abstraction unless a concrete need warrants it.

NATIVE LAUNCHER
launch_mathsgen.py opens mathsgen/worksheet_ui.py.
The UI discovers registered generator metadata on launch.
No separate list of UI question types needs updating.
Each selected type receives the same requested question count.
Set order groups generator sections; random order shuffles the questions.

MULTIPLE CHOICE
Read the live core.py and index_meaning.py before implementing another MCQ.
Question schema v3 has an optional choices tuple, empty for ordinary questions.
Each Choice has an id and Content; correctness belongs in the teacher answer,
not in a public option flag.
Use stable option IDs within the emitted question and store the correct
choice ID in the structured answer. Keep answer_display aligned with the
displayed option letter and mathematical content.
CLI and PDF render the supplied option order.
Shuffle options with context.rng for reproducible placement.
Distractors should represent plausible misconceptions.
Prove exactly one option is equivalent over the stated domain; checking a
single numerical substitution is insufficient.
Check for mathematically duplicate distractors and display mismatches.
State domain restrictions explicitly when roots or negative powers need them.
IndexMeaning supplies a reference implementation, not a universal MCQ engine.

VARIED GEOMETRY DIAGRAMS
mathsgen/figures.py provides place() for shapes defined by actual named points
and orient_scene() for authored scenes, including arcs and right-angle markers.
Choose a seeded orientation only after constructing the mathematics:
    p["orientation"] = figures.choose_orientation(
        rng, lambda orientation: diagram_for(
            dict(p, orientation=orientation), difficulty))
The candidate must render at both 360 and 250 pt. Store the orientation as
[rotation, mirror], require figures.valid_orientation() in validate(), and
rebuild the diagram exactly from the parameters. Bump the generator version;
update version-pinned question support and tools when they still apply.
Add a focused smoke covering orientation variation, both render widths,
independent answers and tampered parameters. A rendered PDF still needs review
on the device. If a CLI fallback describes left/right, upper/lower or sloping
directions, rewrite it to remain true after rotation before using orient_scene().
Triangle angles, Pythagoras, basic and compound areas, right-angled
trigonometry, sine rule, cosine rule, polygons and parallel-line angles are
examples. Prefer figures.place() on true coordinates for new work; cosine
rule v4 is the reference, including seeded vertex lettering.

CIRCLE DIAGRAMS
Use mathsgen/circle_figures.py. Put points at their true positions with
on_circle(), mark angles with angle_mark(), letter vertices with
vertex_label(), then pass the scene through figures.orient_scene().
Choose the orientation with circle_figures.choose_orientation(), which also
requires every label to clear every line at both widths. Store any
presentation choice (letter set, position of a free point on its arc) in the
parameters and bound it in validate(). If long algebraic labels cannot fit
inside an angle, mark u and v and state the expressions in the prompt's
display text. Check independently by measuring a true drawing with atan2
rather than restating the theorem. Circle centre angle v2 and same segment
v3 are the references. The PDF draws a scene beside working space at 238 pt
(pdf.scene_working_row), so circle_figures checks 360, 250 and 238 pt. Put
an interior point's letter with label_in_angle() in its roomiest free angle.
When a form never fits, run dev/probes/probe_circle_clash.py to see which
label blocks it before changing ranges.
Do not combine figures.side_label with orient_scene: side_label sizes its
offset for the text width along the edge as authored, and rotating the
finished scene breaks that. Place the figure first (figures.place, or apply
the rotation directly as sectors v3 does), then compute side labels in the
final frame. Radial and bisector labels rotate safely.

WORDED FORMS IN EXISTING GENERATORS
To add contexts to an existing generator, follow linear_contexts.py or
simultaneous_contexts.py with mathsgen/worded.py; do not register a new ID.
Draw rng.random() < CONTEXT_SHARE[level] once at the start of generate();
dispatch validate/validate_independently on worded.is_worded(question).
Bump the generator version. Guard legacy validators so a malformed answer
raises ValueError. Add a smoke using tests/worded_smoke.run with every
expected form listed per level, and make older smokes skip worded forms.

FINITE VARIATION
Linear nth-term level 1 currently has only eight distinct prompts.
Large single-level requests can exhaust it. Preserve duplicate rejection.
Option reordering should not disguise repeated mathematical questions.
Bulk success does not measure the number of distinct useful questions.